Morning, uh, welcome
to Primary Production Select committee.
I'm Steph. I am our chair.
Uh, it's great to have you long today.
I understand We have Karen, Steven, Edward with us.
That's right. Lovely. Thank you.
We really appreciate your time.
Uh, the, we've got 30 minutes with you today.
This, uh, session is being live streamed
through our Facebook page, so if you could just remember
to speak into the microphones
and, uh, we are in your hands, uh, over to you in terms of
how much you want to talk through us
through your presentation.
And I know that members from, uh,
all sides will have questions.
Okay.
Okay. Um, morning everybody,
and thank you very much for the opportunity.
Um, and we, we welcome, um, your interest as well, um,
in this, in this matter.
Um, so we have
provided some, um, written, um, materials.
So I'll keep, um, my comments brief
because I know you had indicated you had, uh,
questions particularly, um, on the Unleashed, um, wool
as well as the potential future uses of, of wool.
Um, and so this is an area that we've been, um,
particularly, uh, uh, focused on, um, in terms
of revitalizing
and lifting, um, the performance of the sector
and our investment, particularly through, um,
our sustainable, um, our SP futures program, um, has been,
um, focused in this way.
We take a, um, multi, um, horizon view to the, um,
investments that we've been making.
Um, and our, um,
and a a brief summary is that our, um,
our strategy here has been looking to increase the demand
and the value for products manufactured, um, using wool.
Just to sort of recap that funding level
of our investment is $16.6 million, um, of funding
from, um, the SFF futures, um, going to a portfolio
of 16 strong wool projects, um,
with 21.3 million co-funding from, um, industry.
And again, just very briefly, um, those projects, um,
broadly in terms of, um, a strong wool investment focus on,
um, things like new interior products, um, advanced
materials, new consumer products, um, such as, um,
strong wall based, um, adhesive bandages, um,
and new natural fiber, um, combinations.
Um, so that sort of, uh, are very sort of broad sketch
through where our focus, um, has been both in terms
of strategy and investment.
And, um, we welcome, um, any questions?
Thank you very much, um, appreciate your again, uh,
time coming in today.
Um, I'm gonna take the liberty of asking the first question
and that, um, your, uh, written submission
to us focused a lot on what we are looking at internally,
but also you talked about the markets that we compete with.
Uh, what work do you do to monitor the innovation
in the wool industries overseas, uh, for example, Australia?
Um, are they coming up with any new innovation there
that we could leverage off here or maybe even do better?
Um, so maybe I'll take that one.
Uh, so we work very closely
with an industry organization called Wool Impact.
Um, that, and formed by the industry to, I guess, uh,
work towards improving the value of our wool in New Zealand
for the focus on Strong Wall.
Um, they are working hard to understand trends, um,
internationally, um, both in terms of wool manufacturing,
um, also in terms of, uh, innovation
that's happening offshore and in Australia.
And also they're following very closely what's happening
within the plastics industry.
Um, it's obviously a major, um, uh,
reason why the New Zealand wool industry is struggling.
One major D difference between New Zealand
and Australia in terms of our wool industry is
that in New Zealand, we
predominantly producers of Strong Wall.
Uh, we have a, um, uh, a fine industry here,
which, uh, represents about 10%
of the industry, and they're doing quite well.
Sorry, how, what percent? I represent about
10, 10, 10%.
Um, and Australia, their industry is,
is just about all, um, final.
And so that's quite a significant difference
between US and Australia. Sorry,
Can I get you to speak a little
bit closer into the microphone?
Sure. Um, there's quite a big difference between us
and Australia is the type of wool that we,
that we produce predominantly here.
Um, yet, and through working with Wool Impact, um,
we are able to, um, understand some of the trends
that are happening, um, internationally as well as here.
So internationally, just a stuff on that internationally,
would you say that the demand
for fine wool is much greater than the demand
currently for strong wool?
Fine Wall is mostly used for clothing.
So when you buy Marino jerseys, um, uh, fine wall suits, uh,
those are the sorts of uses for Marino.
And, uh, through I think a lot of hard work, uh, 15
to 20 years ago, there's been a real resurgence in terms
of consumer demand for products
that are manufactured using fine wool.
I think most of us have, uh, uh, an icebreaker garment
or something similar in our, in our wardrobes these days,
and that's as a result of a lot of that work
that was done in the fine wall industry
to really drive the consumer demand.
And so Fine Wall has been, uh,
doing much better over the last 20 years than Strong Wall.
Alright, thank you.
I've gotta start on, um, the, uh,
impact group, uh, from Anna.
Hi. Um, you mentioned Wool Impact
and I was quite interested in, I mean, the work
that you are doing, um, with them,
but, um, I mean,
the reality is the wool industry sector has been struggling
and on top of that, we've just had, um,
cyclone Gabriel come through.
We've got a shearing season that we're trying
to to deal with.
We've got severe damage and nap to wool works, wool scours.
We need to be able to get that wool down to, um,
be processed in Roo.
Um, how good is your relationship with the wool industry
and, um, can you tell me what,
um, initiatives you are directly working on with them?
Like what could we be doing with our wool
and housing, all those things
that could actually make a difference for New Zealand wool,
um, both here and internationally, but can you just go back
and tell me a little bit about what you're doing directly
around what's happening now?
Yeah, of course. So as well as, um, well impact
who we are working quite closely within the networks
that they're building within
New Zealand and internationally.
We also have our own direct connections.
Yeah, so we, uh, we know the team at Woolwork well.
Um, also B also had, uh, yes, a factory
that was significantly damaged during the cyclone.
Um, and so we've been talking with them about, uh,
their recovery plans, um,
and how they're getting back on their feet.
Um, we're also have been working, uh, through wool impact
and understanding of the, uh, the transport challenges.
Yeah. Um, how to get, continue
to get Bull Scout in New Zealand.
Uh, so the, the wool scales in Roo are able to have,
have significant additional capacity.
Uh, so there's the challenge
of getting wool transported down there.
One thing which is fortunate is a number of the, uh,
the world transacting companies
or the brokers have, um, had business continuity insurance,
which is able to cover the cost of the transport.
Oo. Um, so wool is being transported south
and being, um, being scoured so that,
uh, customer orders can be met.
Um, it has had an impact on the, um, the price of wool
through the options in, uh, the north island
because of the additional cost for those who didn't have
business continuity insurance.
In terms of the wider industry, we have, um,
like 16 different projects where we are working with a range
of companies around helping them to increase the, uh,
I guess the, or speed up the development of innovative,
innovative uses for Will, um, particularly with a focus on,
um, products that people will buy.
So we have very much a focus on achieving outcomes.
An outcome for us is a,
a new product in market people are buying,
that's actually having an impact on
our value chain for wool.
And so with our strategy for working
with the wool industry is to invest in a range of projects
that will impact on the, the demand
and value for wool from the short term
right through to the long term.
So we're investing in some projects which are focused on
the area, which is the biggest demand for, um, strong Wall,
which is floor coverings.
Uh, so largely carpets, um, helping those companies
with their innovation, helping them with, um, uh,
projects they have
to enter into new markets internationally.
Um, we also are working, uh, with companies
that are develop, developing new products for, uh, the, the,
um, building industry.
So products like, um, sound reducing panels
for which wool has really good properties, um,
wool based insulation, um, which can be used to replace, um,
uh, sort of more traditional insulation in buildings.
Um, that, that will, um, uh, have an impact over the kind
of the, the medium term.
There are products starting to come to market now, um, such
as the sound deepening products
that TR Industries launched last year.
And then we're also investing in the really
new innovative smaller companies, um, uh,
products like the wool bandages that Karen mentioned before.
Um, uh, wool as a, an absorbent product for hygiene, um,
products such as nappies.
They are ones that have a lot of potential, um,
and are also high risk
and will take a while to get to the point
where we have products in market
that are actually requiring role at scale.
So our, our strategy is all around demand and value, um,
and, uh, working with a, a lot of companies in New Zealand
around how to achieve those outcomes.
Um, the, the government through, um, Kaiga order
has a massive, you know, a big building, um, uh,
project going on.
On what, have you done anything
or are you working in any relationship around,
you've got products that are already there, wool,
wool carpet mm-hmm.
Wool insulation, um, have you actually gone
and had a discussion with KAA Aura around?
So we, those opportunities?
So we are working with, um, closely with some
of the companies that have products
that could be used in those building products,
in those building programs.
And it's actually more productive for those companies
to be having those conversations with Kai Aura, also
with the education department, um,
and with MB who manage the building standards.
And, uh, so we are supporting them where need be
because it's obviously a really
significant local opportunity.
Um, so for example, if, um, they, through the Ministry
of Education carpets can be used in new, uh, new classrooms,
that's a significant, um, use of wool, um, that could, uh,
take up a lot of the wool which is currently produced.
You say you're working with the companies,
but is there anything that NPI can do to actually
get around the table and come up with even a, um, some type
of, um, I don't know, contract or an opportunity
or investment in there?
Because surely that would help New Zealand farmers?
Yeah, so we're, we are of course working
with those companies and providing them any
assistance that they need. Um, like,
Like what?
Um, so, uh, maybe as an example,
um, there's one of the companies which is working on wool
and tiles, which is actually a new product.
Um, we're all familiar with, uh, with carpet tiles.
Um, but they're all synthetic.
Um, there have been manufacturing challenges
around being able to manufacture wool and carpet tiles.
And, uh, now that they're able to be produced,
there are much more viable product for commercial interiors,
um, within building, uh,
because when you're building a classroom
or a commercial interior laying some tiles, it's very quick
and easy and it's easy to replace 'em if you have issues.
Um, so now wool can actually compete in that space.
So that's an example of where we've actually helped a
company with the development of that so
that they can enter into
that commercial markup with those tiles.
Uh, we've gotta set, uh, no, no,
we've gotta set from Ian and then I'll come to you, David.
I'm really worried about putting this stuff in here
because I'm sitting between two dairy farmers.
Um, just, just my question relates
because it, it seems to me that,
and it might be outside your mandate,
but one of the challenges the wool industry's got is it's
so expensive compared to all the other products
that are on the market, and it's been the challenge
for some years now and,
and that's a very difficult problem to overcome.
All those products you talk about are much more
significantly more expensive than normal products.
They be so, so you go,
Yeah, maybe, maybe a couple of things in there.
Um, from a manufacturing perspective,
synthetics do have some advantages.
Well, as a natural product has variation, um,
variation in length, variation in kind of the curl
of the fibers and things like that, um, synthetic
materials used in manufacture a cup, for example,
you know exactly what you're gonna get.
It's always the same, and so it is cheaper to manufacture.
Um, but in saying that, uh, there are New Zealand companies
that are doing some really interesting things
around the value chain that they work with to be able
to bring more price competitive products into New Zealand.
So an example would be wools of New Zealand.
Uh, they have, um, over the last couple
of years changed the way that they, um, manufacture carpets.
So they're owning the product all the way
to the carpet at the end.
They're using international, um, manufacturing facilities so
that they're able to get manufacturing done at a,
at a com price competitive way.
And so they are, um, now selling carpets in New Zealand
that are quite competitive to comparable synthetic carpets.
They're a little bit cheaper,
but they're, um, oh no, sorry,
they're a little bit more expensive,
but they're, they're very competitive.
And so they are one of the companies
that are targeting things like ING
or is building program with their woolen carpets.
Um, Do you think you've got the right strategy?
Uh, like, it, it seems a bit of a lot.
You know, you, you, you've got a lot
of companies, a lot of different things.
You're putting a bit of money into each one, hoping one
of them's the golden goose that turns the industry around.
Um, isn't there a more strategic focus
that NPI should be taking around, um, how we
actually get the value chain of all that,
that wall in one place effectively,
and then how we negotiate that value chain, um,
with maybe international providers, you know,
like Silver Firm Farm's, great example
where they did something that at the time people were going,
oh, no, can't have that.
But now 10 years later, it's turned out
to be the best thing for them.
Um, I just worry that giving 2 million bucks
to this and 2 million bucks to that to get some,
some glorified project
that they're just gonna sell when it hits a decent size
anyway, doesn't actually get the result we want
for New Zealand Strong Wall, which actually
fundamentally has to go back to a position where
we probably haven't got so much division amongst the,
the players that buy the wool off the farmers.
Um, there's more control in there.
Um, there's more, um, unity there.
And that's, and I know you've got your wool impact,
which is starting to get down that path,
but it's, it's a, it's an overarching group.
It's not really got any guts to it in the sense of
how you actually corporatize that.
So, um, have you thought about a different structure
rather than what we're doing at the
moment, which is playing lotto?
Um, and if you have,
how could you make that work?
So we work on the basis, we, we have, um, uh,
quite an in-depth, um, investment approach
for the projects that we support.
Um, we only support those projects
where we can see brilliant success,
No offense to Another really important part of that is
that, um, uh, we are interested in benefits
that can be delivered for New Zealand.
And so one part of our assessment is making sure
that the projects that we invest in
and the companies that we invest with, um, we can see
that there's gonna be sustainable benefits delivered here.
Yeah, I get, for example,
We get all that. Okay.
You're not answering the question, which is
So, So had you thought
of a different strategy and what could it look like?
Um, so we are very confident in the
strategy that we are taking.
Um, some, some of the companies we are working with,
for example, are, um, wool of New Zealand,
which is actually pharma owned.
Um, and the, the strategy that they're taking of making sure
that they own the product all the way through, um,
is something which will definitely help deliver
long-term benefits in New Zealand.
Another thing which we are very focused on, um,
an approach which worked well within the fine wall industry
is to, um, encourage the contracting of the provision
of wool directly between farmers
and manufacturers to bypass the option system.
That's something which we are, when we, where we can,
we are supporting that approach within the strong wall
industry, and we're starting to see some changes.
There are more and more, um, manufacturers
and end users of pro of Strong Wall who are starting
to contract directly with Farmers.
So, um, our strategy
and our approach is designed to, um,
address the concerns that you've raised.
Uh, next question from Sara.
Um, Mason based in the mp
and based in, my question is around the Maori economy,
it's worth something like $50 billion, um,
but our serious investors in the wider agriculture sector,
I just wondered, um, what work or, um, that you've done
or what engagement or what leverage
or opportunities, um, there may be out there in terms
of that economy?
So, um, Eno Maori landowners are some
of the largest strong wall producers in New Zealand.
Um, one of the projects that we have invested in
with Marino New Zealand, the W three, um,
will unleash program.
A part of that was, um, directly focused on working with
many of our larger strong wall producers.
And, and they had an, an intentional strategy
to work closely with UA Maori landowners
In, in terms of that strategy, um, and alignment.
Obviously there must be some alignment there,
but I just wondered, are you able to just share with us all,
um, their engagement or if, if indeed, um, with the projects
and the work, and I, and I really
like the work that you're doing.
I, I like that you're spreading the investment
and not having all your eggs in one basket.
So, um, I just wondered, you know, uh, in terms of
that leverage, in those opportunities, um, do,
do they engage in the, in the projects that you've,
you know, you've put before us here?
Um, so in work off the top of my head, I wouldn't be able
to, uh, tell you who the landowners That's okay.
There are, that the projects are working with in terms
of direct supply of, well, um, we work very closely
with our Maori agri business team
and NPI, um, to identify where there are opportunities
for us to support, um, uh, Maori agri businesses,
whether they're in the, um, production end, um,
or on the manufacturing end.
Um, and, uh, yeah, we're, we're always looking
for opportunities to support, um, uh, Maori agribusiness.
Um, we are, can help us, well as, as well
as our wider investment portfolio, I should say.
Thank you. Um, mark, morning everyone.
Sorry for my party arrival.
Um, um, yes, I'm the,
the dairy farm along with Mr. Bennett here.
I do muck around with wool, have been in wool press.
I know all about it. Question I do have for you, um,
is it a case of trying to find more from lease?
We've got a, you know, a current situation
where we see the wool industry disproportionately affected
by all things, um, emissions pricing scheme.
And you've got your 16 projects here, which is,
and I see the millions of dollars divided up.
What does that look like in terms of your role for
advocacy given that we, it appears that this is targeting
commodities and outcomes, given that strong will evolved
was a thing that we grew exceedingly
well very, very cheaply.
And that's changed in the margins
for the farmers are very, very slight.
So is it a high-end market that we're now now trying
to create through regulatory frameworks
through these programs?
The second question I have for you is the RMA
and prescriptions and around environmental constraints
for scouring plants changed a lot of the dynamics
for production of here in New Zealand,
every small town has a scouring plant.
Now they nine on non-existent, which has
fueled the flames of difficulty when it comes from product
to outcomes and efficiency gains are lost.
So how do you reconcile that, given that, again, this seems
to be creating a commodity?
You know, we are investing in new technologies
and that's great, but we're sort of walked away.
It appears we walked away from growing more efficiently
and really well and cheaply,
and the sense of the farmers are now so marginal.
We are looking at high end stuff, value add, you might say.
So they, um, New Zealand is still one
of the best producers of, uh, strong will.
Um, our strong will producer in New Zealand is considered
to be the best in the world, and it largely
comes down to our climate.
We can grow nice white, um, flees, um,
the, uh, projects that we're investing in, the
building products, projects
and also the higher, um, higher value projects like, um, uh,
pigments, um, and bandages and hygiene products.
Um, they're all based on achieving a, a much,
much higher price for, well, um, so for example,
the pigments project, they're targeting, um,
at least $10 a kilo.
So value products.
Yeah, absolutely. And so, um, that's
where I guess it's important our, our multi um, horizon
strategy, um, comes in that the, we need to get to a point
where we are getting, um, five to $10 per kilo for wool.
That's critical in terms of the, um, value that comes back
to farmers for their wool production and,
and bringing, bringing wool back to the point where
it's actually a strong contributor to a farmer's, uh,
a sheep farmer's income.
The, uh, that will take time.
Um, because, uh, products have to be developed,
those markets have to be developed, those products have
to get in market and then grow to a sufficient scale,
whether impacting on the value for wool overall.
And that's why we are continuing
to invest in innovations within the current use of wool,
because that's where we can have, um,
an impact on the current demand
and the scale when, um, the, one of the key things
to increasing the value for wool as ensuring that the demand
or getting to back to the point where the demand
for wool exceeds the supply for wool.
Um, once we have, uh, more manufacturers that are looking
for wool to, uh, manufacture their products,
then we have supply, then we'll see the price
for wool start to increase quite quickly.
I a supplementary if I mate Yeah, I do too.
Oh, thank you Madam Chair.
Um, to that point though, I mean, gosh,
this means it's long time since the fifties when,
where there were walls on and, and you know, all uniforms.
So again, respect to you doesn't,
it doesn't seem like you've answered the entirety
of the question, are we chasing less, trying
to create more based on the fact that now we know that,
that, that these markets don't exist.
You talk about technologies that are emerging
and is it the fact of
that we've got a constrained in industry
for various reasons, and I'm not gonna get into the politics
of it, but by virtue we can, we can see
that hay wind's gonna affect one
in five farmers potentially.
And are we trying to chase a narrowing window
with commodities yet to be designed?
Uh, and and how do you, to the point about the RMA stuff,
how do you reconcile it?
So it's still very hard to produce this stuff cheaply here.
You know, SC plants, to my point
you didn't quite touch on that.
Um, most of 'em are gone.
So our focus, our focus has to be on consumers
and the markets, the people who will actually buy products
that us well and making sure that those products are ones
that will deliver high value.
What won't be successful is focusing on the cost
of production, um, the, uh, the cost of scouring, uh,
the cost of transport.
Um, the problem is, is those things are not covered
by the price which is paid.
So we need to make sure that we are focusing on, um,
what are consumers want that include, well, where can,
where can the industry earn much higher
premiums for wool and products?
Um, in terms of the current demand, um, there's some really,
uh, major themes emerging internationally in
markets about synthetics.
And people are now starting to realize that, um,
the really huge environmental impact of synthetics,
for example, the microfibers that are lost from, um,
synthetic carpets, um, and go into the environment.
Um, and also what do you do
with the synthetic carpet once it gets end of life?
It all goes into landfill.
Um, we are starting to see those trends turn into a change
for demand of wall and carpet.
So for example, um, one of the, uh,
major carpet retailers, um, uh, through them we learned
that they had sold 20% more wool
and carpets over the last year than they previously had.
So we are seeing consumers start to return
to natural products, um,
because they're becoming more aware of the impacts
and synthetic products on the environment
and, um, we expect that trend to continue.
And so, uh, there is, um, a, there are a lot
of positive signs in terms of, um, uh, wool and carpets
and the demand that they'll pull through for wool.
Following on from that, in terms of wool's ability
to be competitive with those synthetics, as we, uh,
you know, we've only got a finite amount of, a lot
of the synthetics are based on, uh, made from fossil fuels.
We've only got a finite amount of that left.
And we are seeing the demand globally shift
to move away from that reliance on, um,
those synthetic fossil fuel products as,
which will then result in the, the cost
of those synthetic products increasing.
And so that, does that then make wool a more competitive
option as well and,
and help in, in terms of our wool market?
Um, or is that Still too early?
The, it'll take some time I think for, um, the cost
of synthetic products to change to, um, affect the price of,
um, things like plastic carpet.
Um, but uh, the changes in, um,
consumer demand for products that are, um, better
for our environment, um, will have an impact more quickly
and is starting to have an impact.
Uh, final question for the morning to Ian McKelvy,
You touched on what I was gonna ask you actually.
Um, with respect to this environmental challenge.
So, uh, um, in the garage
and the place I lived this morning,
new turned up was $8,000 subsidy on it.
So it seems to me there's no difference between that
and the potential to, uh, incentivize
water into the building industry for the same reason
that we're subsidizing Teslas.
Um, and did only work on that,
or is there any work being done on that by the ministry?
Um, we're not looking at, um, subsidizing, well,
we are working on projects where we can see
that it wool makes, wool makes more sense
to those who are buying products. We
Shouldn't used the word subsidized.
So I think, I think,
but incentivized shouldn't be the word I used. Mm.
Um, But it seems to me that it's extraordinary
that we've got both wood
and wool that could solve a lot of our challenges
around environmental building standards.
And they're not in any way.
And it was a bit of related to the question,
I think Anna asked earlier, but not in any way incentivized
or, or we're not utilizing that, that potential,
I guess we we're focusing on making sure there's a good
understanding of the differences
between synthetic products and natural products.
And, um, uh, as we touched on earlier, um, some
of the local companies are working really hard in terms
of getting their products into the
New Zealand building industry.
Um, it's much more long-term, um, viable
and commercially sustainable
of products are just fundamentally better
and fundamentally, fundamentally a better choice.
And that's what will actually really drive the demand
for wool and the, um, the value that we earn for our wool.
Do you, with the getting them into New Zealand's, um,
building sector, do you support those companies with, um,
marketing and education campaigns around, uh, the products
that they offer to and,
and aim that at the building sector as well?
Um, yes, we do. Where they, we that looking
for support from us
and where we can see
that our support will actually make a difference, um,
then we're absolutely will assist them with that.
And in terms of the,
I know I said anyone's having the final question,
but I'm the daughter of a sheep and bee farmer.
So, um, uh, in terms of the, um,
the, just wanna come back to the wool scouring issue
and uh, come back to a point that you made, um,
earlier about some of the farmers being affected, uh,
because they don't have business continuity insurance.
Is the ministry doing anything to work with those farmers
and support them?
So it's actually the, the wool brokers, um, who had the,
uh, who have the business continuity insurance,
which is enabling them to cover the additional cost.
Um, we are working closely with wall impact, understand, um,
what is happening within the industry,
are there some opportunities for us collectively, um, to see
what we can do to reduce the burden on farmers, which is
after all our, um, main focus is farmers
and, uh, what they are earning for their wool.
Mm-hmm. Um, we do have to be very careful, um,
when we're working in an area where, um, uh,
companies are able to get insurance cover
because we don't want to inadvertently encourage people not
to get insurance company cover in future. Yeah.
The comments. And one final quick question. Sorry,
I can understand your passion.
I grew up on a farm as well, spent my time in the wool shed.
Yeah. Um, uh, it feels like going home, um, with the,
coming back to the issue around, you know,
the particular word that Mr.
McKelvy used around subsidies
and trying to get our products into the New Zealand market
and incentivize them, uh, the use, uh,
what work does the ministry do around, um,
trying to support that incentivization without breaching,
um, our trade agreements and,
and getting us into hot water there?
Are you looking for innovative ways to,
to work in that space as well?
Well, I guess our whole investment program as a way of,
um, supporting those companies, that's not
what I call an incentive.
Um, it is something which is consistent
with our international trade obligations.
Um, uh, and uh, whole investment program is a way
of helping the local industry with, um, projects
and accelerating the speed that they can innovate
and the speed that they can get things into new markets.
Thank you. Really appreciate your time today.
Um, as you can see, the committee has a great deal
of interest in this topic,
even the dairy farmers in the room.
Um, so we really appreciate you taking the time
and staying for a couple of extra
minutes to answer our questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks.